Measurement and Fairness
Abigail Z. Jacobs

Hanna Wallach

arXiv:1912.05511v3 [cs.CY] 12 Mar 2021

azjacobs@umich.edu
University of Michigan

hanna@dirichlet.net
Microsoft Research

ABSTRACT

1

We propose measurement modeling from the quantitative social sciences as a framework for understanding fairness in computational
systems. Computational systems often involve unobservable theoretical constructs, such as socioeconomic status, teacher effectiveness,
and risk of recidivism. Such constructs cannot be measured directly
and must instead be inferred from measurements of observable
properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs) thought
to be related to them—i.e., operationalized via a measurement model.
This process, which necessarily involves making assumptions, introduces the potential for mismatches between the theoretical understanding of the construct purported to be measured and its
operationalization. We argue that many of the harms discussed in
the literature on fairness in computational systems are direct results
of such mismatches. We show how some of these harms could have
been anticipated and, in some cases, mitigated if viewed through the
lens of measurement modeling. To do this, we contribute fairnessoriented conceptualizations of construct reliability and construct
validity that unite traditions from political science, education, and
psychology and provide a set of tools for making explicit and testing assumptions about constructs and their operationalizations. We
then turn to fairness itself, an essentially contested construct that has
different theoretical understandings in different contexts. We argue that this contestedness underlies recent debates about fairness
definitions: although these debates appear to be about different operationalizations, they are, in fact, debates about different theoretical
understandings of fairness. We show how measurement modeling
can provide a framework for getting to the core of these debates.

Computational systems have long been touted as having the potential to counter societal biases and structural inequalities, yet
recent work has demonstrated that they often end up encoding and
exacerbating them instead. Indeed, the literature on fairness in computational systems has identified many types of fairness-related
harms [6, 16], as well as many potential causes, including societal biases reflected in the content of training datasets, too few data points
about particular groups of people, and assumptions made throughout the development and deployment lifecycle [e.g., 44]. However,
we argue that these discussions have overlooked an important subtlety: computational systems often involve unobservable theoretical
constructs—abstractions that describe phenomena of theoretical interest, such as socioeconomic status, teacher effectiveness, and risk
of recidivism. Because these constructs cannot be observed, they
cannot be measured directly. Instead, they must instead be inferred
from measurements of observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs) thought to be related to them—i.e., operationalized via a measurement model. This process—the measurement modeling process— necessarily involves making assumptions,
thereby introducing the potential for mismatches between the theoretical understanding of the construct purported to be measured
and its operationalization in a measurement model. Indeed, we
argue that many of the harms studied in the literature on fairness
in computational systems are direct results of such mismatches.
Although it is fundamental to the quantitative social sciences,
measurement modeling is largely missing from 1) computer science
in general and 2) the discourse around and literature on fairness
in computational systems in particular.1 As a result, researchers
and practitioners are often inclined to conflate constructs and their
operationalizations—i.e., to collapse the distinctions between them.
But collapsing these distinctions, either colloquially or epistemically,
makes it difficult to anticipate, let alone mitigate, any possible
mismatches. In other words, collapsing these distinctions elides the
space in which fairness-related harms are most often introduced.
In this paper, we propose measurement modeling as a framework
for understanding fairness in computational systems. Measurement
modeling provides both a language for articulating the distinctions
between constructs and their operationalizations and set of tools—
namely construct reliability and construct validity—for surfacing
possible mismatches. We argue that these capabilities will enable
researchers and practitioners to 1) better anticipate fairness-related
harms before deploying computational systems in consequential
ways and 2) identify potential causes of fairness-related harms in
ways that reveal concrete, actionable avenues for mitigating them.

CCS CONCEPTS
• General and reference → Measurement; Validation; Reliability.

KEYWORDS
measurement, construct validity, construct reliability, fairness
ACM Reference Format:
Abigail Z. Jacobs and Hanna Wallach. 2021. Measurement and Fairness. In
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’21), March
3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445901

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8309-7/21/03.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445901

INTRODUCTION

1 We expect that readers from the quantitative social sciences will already be intimately

familiar with measurement modeling. Indeed, some may even wonder why we chose
to write this paper. However, we emphasize that many researchers and practitioners
outside of these disciplines have not heard of measurement modeling at all, let alone
as a framework for understanding fairness in computational systems. We therefore
view this paper as contributing an important bridge between disparate disciplines.

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

We further explain how measurement modeling can contribute
to recent debates about fairness definitions. Fairness itself is an
unobservable theoretical construct, albeit one that is essentially
contested [21, 42]. In other words, fairness has multiple contextdependent, and sometimes even conflicting, theoretical understandings. The contested nature of fairness makes it inherently hard
to measure: If there are multiple theoretical understandings of a
construct, then it is imperative to articulate which understanding
is being operationalized. A failure to do this makes it difficult to
meaningfully compare different operationalizations because they
may be operationalizing different theoretical understandings. In
turn, this makes it difficult to identify mismatches between fairness
as it is theoretically understood and any given operationalization.
We argue that although recent debates about fairness definitions
have been framed in terms of operationalizations, they are, in fact,
debates about different theoretical understandings of fairness—i.e.,
about the essentially contested nature of fairness as a construct.
We show how measurement modeling can get to the core of these
debates by providing a language for disentangling debates about
different operationalizations of a single theoretical understanding
from debates about different, and possibly conflicting, theoretical
understandings. This is crucial because debates about different operationalizations of a single theoretical understanding are debates
about the measurement modeling process—i.e., the assumptions
made when moving from abstractions to mathematics—while debates about different theoretical understandings are debates about
values.2 We argue that debates about values should be explicitly
treated as such instead of being couched indirectly in mathematics,
where they are rendered less accessible to the stakeholders that are
most likely to be affected by the computational systems in question.
In the next section, we give a brief overview of the measurement modeling process, drawing on well-known examples from the
literature on fairness in computational systems. In section 3, we contribute fairness-oriented conceptualizations of construct reliability
and construct validity, uniting traditions from political science, education, and psychology. We use the examples introduced in section 2
to illustrate how these conceptualizations can be used to surface mismatches between constructs and their operationalizations. In section 4, we turn to fairness itself, addressing recent debates about fairness definitions. Finally, we conclude with a discussion in section 5.

2

MAKING ASSUMPTIONS

Measurement modeling plays a central role in the quantitative social sciences, where many theories involve unobservable theoretical
constructs—i.e., abstractions that describe phenomena of theoretical
interest. For example, researchers in psychology and education have
long been interested in studying intelligence, while political scientists and sociologists are often concerned with political ideology
and socioeconomic status, respectively. Although these constructs
do not manifest themselves directly in the world, and therefore
cannot be measured directly, they are fundamental to society and
thought to be related to a wide range of observable properties.

Jacobs and Wallach

A measurement model is a statistical model that links unobservable theoretical constructs, operationalized as latent variables, and
observable properties—i.e., data about the world [30]. In this section, we give a brief overview of the measurement modeling process, starting with two comparatively simple examples—measuring
height and measuring socioeconomic status—before moving on
to three well-known examples from the literature on fairness in
computational systems. We emphasize that our goal in this section
is not to provide comprehensive mathematical details for each of
our five examples, but instead to introduce key terminology and,
more importantly, to highlight that the measurement modeling process necessarily involves making assumptions that must be made
explicit and tested before the resulting measurements are used.

2.1

Measuring Height

We start by formalizing the process of measuring the height of a
person—a property that is typically thought of as being observable
and therefore easy to measure directly. There are many standard
tools for measuring height, including rulers, tape measures, and
height rods. Indeed, measurements of observable properties like
height are sometimes called representational measurements because
they are derived by “representing physical objects [such as people
and rulers] and their relationships by numbers” [25]. Although the
height of a person is not an unobservable theoretical construct, for
the purpose of exposition, we refer to the abstraction of height as
a construct H and then operationalize H as a latent variable ℎ.
Despite the conceptual simplicity of height—usually understood
to be the length from the bottom of a person’s feet to the top of their
head when standing erect—measuring it involves making several assumptions, all of which are more or less appropriate in different contexts and can even affect different people in different ways. For example, should a person’s hair contribute to their height? What about
their shoes? Neither are typically viewed as being an intrinsic part of
a person’s height, yet both contribute to a person’s effective height,
which may matter more in ergonomic contexts. Similarly, if a person
uses a wheelchair, then their standing height may be less relevant
than their sitting height. These assumptions must be made explicit
and tested before using any measurements that depend upon them.
In practice, it is not possible to obtain error-free measurements
of a person’s height, even when using standard tools. For example,
when using a ruler, the angle of the ruler, the granularity of the
marks, and human error can all result in erroneous measurements.
𝑁 of a person’s height,
However, if we take 𝑁 measurements {ℎˆ𝑛 }𝑛=
1
then provided that the ruler is not statistically biased, the average
will converge to the person’s “true” height ℎ with probability one
as 𝑁 → ∞. Specifically, we say that the person’s true height—the
𝑁 —a set of 𝑁
latent variable ℎ—influences the measurements {ℎˆ𝑛 }𝑛=
1
observed variables. We can represent this relationship using a graphical model, as shown below. Observed variables are shaded, latent
variables are unshaded, and annotated boxes denote replication.

Alternatively, we can represent the 𝑛 th measurement as
2 We emphasize that this is not to say that values play no role in the measurement

modeling process—quite the contrary, as we explain in the first half of this paper.

ℎˆ𝑛 = ℎ + 𝜖𝑛 ,

(1)

Measurement and Fairness

where 𝜖𝑛 is the error associated with ℎˆ𝑛 . In many contexts, it is rea𝑁 are wellsonable to assume that the errors associated with {ℎˆ𝑛 }𝑛=
1
behaved—i.e., normally distributed, statistically unbiased, and possessing small variance 𝜎 2 . Under this assumption, 𝜖𝑛 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2 )—
i.e., each error is drawn from a zero-mean normal distribution with
Í𝑁 ˆ
variance 𝜎 2 . This means that 𝑁1 𝑛=
1 ℎ𝑛 → ℎ with probability one
as 𝑁 → ∞—a property of a consistent estimator. Equation 1 is
equivalent to the graphical model representation above provided
that ℎˆ𝑛 ∼ N (ℎ, 𝜎 2 ) for 𝑛 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 . Borrowing from the economics
literature, we refer to models that formalize the relationships between measurements and their errors as measurement error models.
We emphasize that even specifying a measurement error model
involves making assumptions. For instance, in some contexts, the
𝑁 may not be not well-behaved and
errors associated with {ℎˆ𝑛 }𝑛=
1
may even be correlated with demographic factors, such as race
𝑁 come not from a
or gender. As an example, suppose that {ℎˆ𝑛 }𝑛=
1
ruler but instead from self-reports on dating websites. It might initially seem reasonable to assume that the corresponding errors are
well-behaved in this context. However, Toma et al. [54] found that
although men and women both over-report their height on dating
websites, men are more likely to over-report and to over-report by a
larger amount. Toma et al. suggest this is strategic, likely representing intentional deception. However, regardless of the cause, these
errors are not well-behaved and are correlated with gender. Assuming that they are well-behaved will yield inaccurate measurements.

2.2

Measuring Socioeconomic Status

We now consider the process of measuring a person’s socioeconomic status (SES). From a theoretical perspective, a person’s SES
is understood as encompassing their social and economic position
in relation to others. Unlike a person’s height, their SES is unobservable, so it cannot be measured directly and must instead be
inferred from measurements of observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs) thought to be related to it, such
as income, wealth, education, and occupation. Measurements of
phenomena like SES are sometimes called pragmatic measurements
because they are designed to capture particular aspects of a phenomenon for particular purposes [25]. We refer to the abstraction of
SES as a construct S and then operationalize S as a latent variable 𝑠.
The simplest way to measure a person’s SES is to use an observable property—like their income—as a proxy for it. Letting the construct I represent the abstraction of income and operationalizing
I as a latent variable 𝑖, this means specifying a both measurement
model that links 𝑠 and 𝑖 and a measurement error model. For example, if we assume that 𝑠 and 𝑖 are linked via the identity function—i.e.,
that 𝑠 = 𝑖—and we assume that it is possible to obtain error-free
measurements of a person’s income—i.e., that ˆ
𝑖 = 𝑖—then 𝑠 = ˆ
𝑖.
Like the previous example, this example highlights that the measurement modeling process necessarily involves making assumptions. Indeed, there are many other measurement models that use
income as a proxy for SES but make different assumptions about the
specific relationship between them, including other deterministic
models—e.g., 𝑖 = 4 × 𝑠 2 —and random models—e.g., 𝑖 ∼ 𝑁 (𝑠, 𝜎 2 ).
Similarly, there are many other measurement error models that
make different assumptions about the errors that occur when measuring a person’s income. For example, if we measure a person’s

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

monthly income by totaling the wages deposited into their account
over a single one-month period, then we must use a measurement
error model that accounts for the possibility that the timing of the
one-month period and the timings of their wage deposits may not
be aligned. Using a measurement error model that does not account
𝑖 = 𝑖—will yield inaccurate measurefor this possibility—e.g., using ˆ
ments. Human Rights Watch reported exactly this scenario in the
context of the Universal Credit benefits system in the U.K. [55]: The
system measured a claimant’s monthly income using a one-month
rolling period that began immediately after they submitted their
claim without accounting for the possibility described above. This
meant that the system “might detect that an individual received a
£1000 paycheck on March 30 and another £1000 on April 29, but not
that each £1000 salary is a monthly wage [leading it] to compute
the individual’s benefit in May based on the incorrect assumption that their combined earnings for March and April (i.e., £2000)
are their monthly wage,” denying them much-needed resources.
Moving beyond income as a proxy for SES, there are arbitrarily many ways to operationalize SES via a measurement model,
incorporating both measurements of observable properties, such
as wealth, education, and occupation, as well as measurements of
other unobservable theoretical constructs, such as cultural capital.

2.3

Measuring Teacher Effectiveness

We turn next to three well-known examples from the literature on
fairness in computational systems, starting with the value-added
models that are used by many school districts to measure the “value
added” to students’ academic progress by a teacher—i.e., teacher effectiveness. At the risk of stating the obvious, teacher effectiveness
is an unobservable theoretical construct that cannot be measured
directly and must instead be inferred from measurements of observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs).
Many organizations have developed models that purport to measure
teacher effectiveness. For instance, SAS’s Education Value-Added
Assessment System (EVAAS), which is widely used across the U.S.,
implements two models—a multivariate response model (MRM) intended to be used when standardized tests are given to students in
consecutive grades and a univariate response model intended to be
used in other testing contexts. Although the models differ in terms
of their mathematical details, both use changes in students’ test
scores (an observable property) as a proxy for teacher effectiveness.
We focus on the EVAAS MRM in this example, though we emphasize that many of the assumptions that it makes—most notably that students’ test scores are a reasonable proxy for teacher
effectiveness—are common to other value-added models. When
describing the MRM, the EVAAS documentation states that “each
teacher is assumed to be the state or district average in a specific
year, subject, and grade until the weight of evidence pulls him or
her above or below that average” [51]. The MRM operationalizes
the effectiveness of teacher 𝑡 for subject 𝑗, grade 𝑘, and year3 𝑙

3 Year 𝑙 is only present for accounting purposes; it is effectively determined by (𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘) .

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

Jacobs and Wallach

as a latent variable 𝑞𝑡 𝑗𝑘𝑙 via the following measurement model:
𝑞𝑡 𝑗𝑘𝑙 = 𝜇 𝑗𝑘𝑙 +

∑︁

𝜏𝑖 𝑗𝑘𝑙𝑡

(2)

𝑖
𝑇𝑖 𝑗𝑘 ∗ 𝑙 ∗
© ∑︁ ∑︁
ª
𝑦𝑖 𝑗𝑘𝑙 = 𝜇 𝑗𝑘𝑙 + 𝑤𝑖 𝑗𝑘 ∗𝑙 ∗𝑡 𝜏𝑖 𝑗𝑘 ∗𝑙 ∗𝑡 ® ,
∗
«𝑘 <=𝑘 𝑡 =1
¬

(3)

where 𝜇 𝑗𝑘𝑙 is the state or district’s estimated mean score for subject
𝑗 in grade 𝑘 in year 𝑙, 𝜏𝑖 𝑗𝑘𝑙𝑡 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2𝑗𝑘𝑙 ) is the effect of teacher 𝑡
on student 𝑖 for subject 𝑗 in grade 𝑘 in year 𝑙, 𝑦𝑖 𝑗𝑘𝑙 is student 𝑖’s test
score for subject 𝑗 in grade 𝑘 in year 𝑙, 𝑤𝑖 𝑗𝑘 ∗𝑙 ∗𝑡 is the fraction of
student 𝑖’s instructional time attributed to teacher 𝑡 for subject 𝑗 in
grade 𝑘 in year 𝑙, and 𝜏𝑖 𝑗𝑘 ∗𝑙 ∗𝑡 is the effect of teacher 𝑡 on student 𝑖
for subject 𝑗 in grade 𝑘 ∗ in year 𝑙 ∗ . The teacher effects are assumed
to be normally distributed around zero, with a block diagonal covariance matrix that contains a block for each subject 𝑗, grade 𝑘, and
year 𝑙. The MRM’s measurement error model is 𝑦ˆ𝑖 𝑗𝑘𝑙 = 𝑦𝑖 𝑗𝑘𝑙 + 𝜖𝑖 𝑗𝑘𝑙 ,
where 𝜖𝑖 𝑗𝑘𝑙 is assumed to be normally distributed around zero.
As well as assuming that teacher effectiveness is fully captured by
students’ test scores, this model makes several other assumptions,
which we make explicit here for expository purposes: 1) that student
𝑖’s test score for subject 𝑗 in grade 𝑘 in year 𝑙 is a function of only
their current and previous teachers’ effects; 2) that the effectiveness
of teacher𝑡 for subject 𝑗, grade𝑘, and year𝑙 depends on their effects on
all of their students; 3) that student 𝑖’s instructional time for subject 𝑗
in grade 𝑘 in year 𝑙 may be shared between teachers; and 4) that
a teacher may be effective in one subject but ineffective in another.

2.4

Measuring Risk of Recidivism

We now consider another well-known example from the literature
on fairness in computational systems: the risk assessment models
used in the U.S. justice system to measure a defendant’s risk of recidivism. There are many such models, but we focus here on Northpointe’s Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions (COMPAS), which was the subject of an investigation
by Angwin et al. [4] and many academic papers [e.g., 9, 14, 34].
COMPAS draws on several criminological theories to operationalize a defendant’s risk of recidivism using measurements of
a variety of observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs) derived from official records and interviews. These
properties and measurements span four different dimensions: prior
criminal history, criminal associates, drug involvement, and early
indicators of juvenile delinquency problems [19]. The measurements are combined in a regression model, which outputs a score
that is converted to a number between one and ten with ten being
the highest risk. Although the full mathematical details of COMPAS
are not readily available, the COMPAS documentation mentions numerous assumptions, the most important of which is that recidivism
is defined as “a new misdemeanor or felony arrest within two years.”
We discuss the implications of this assumption in sections 3 and 4.

2.5

Measuring Patient Benefit

Finally, we turn to a different type of risk assessment model, used in
the U.S. healthcare system to identify the patients that will benefit

the most from enrollment in high-risk care management programs—
i.e., programs that provide access to additional resources for patients with complex health issues. As explained by Obermeyer et
al., these models assume that “those with the greatest care needs
will benefit the most from the programs” [43]. Furthermore, many
of them operationalize greatest care needs as greatest care costs.
This assumption—i.e., that care costs are a reasonable proxy for
care needs—transforms the difficult task of measuring the extent
to which a patient will benefit from a program (an unobservable
theoretical construct) into the simpler task of predicting their future
care costs based on their past care costs (an observable property).
However, this assumption masks an important confounding factor:
patients with comparable past care needs but different access to
care will likely have different past care costs. As we explain in the
next section, even without considering any other details of these
models, this assumption can lead to fairness-related harms [43].

3

TESTING ASSUMPTIONS

As we explained in the previous section, the measurement modeling
process necessarily involves making assumptions. However, these
assumptions must be made explicit and tested before the resulting
measurements are used. Leaving them implicit or untested obscures
any possible mismatches between the theoretical understanding of
the construct purported to be measured and its operationalization,
in turn obscuring any resulting fairness-related harms. In this section, we show how measurement modeling provides a set of tools
for surfacing such mismatches. These tools differentiate measurement modeling from statistical modeling and machine learning as
they are typically used in computer science. We therefore argue
that it is these tools that give measurement modeling its power as
a framework for understanding fairness in computational systems.
In contrast to computer scientists, who focus primarily on out-ofsample prediction, quantitative social scientists typically test their
assumptions by assessing construct reliability and construct validity.
Quinn et al. describe these concepts as follows: “The evaluation
of any measurement is generally based on its reliability (can it be
repeated?) and validity (is it right?). Embedded within the complex
notion of validity are interpretation (what does it mean?) and application (does it ‘work?’)” [49]. We contribute fairness-oriented conceptualizations of construct reliability and construct validity that
unite traditions from political science, education, and psychology by
drawing on the work of Quinn et al. [49], Jackman [30], Messick [40],
and Loevinger [36], among others. We illustrate these conceptualizations using the five examples introduced in the previous section, arguing that they constitute a set of tools that will enable researchers
and practitioners to 1) better anticipate fairness-related harms that
can be obscured by focusing primarily on out-of-sample prediction, and 2) identify potential causes of fairness-related harms in
ways that reveal concrete, actionable avenues for mitigating them.

3.1

Construct Reliability

We start by describing construct reliability—a concept that is roughly
analogous to the concept of precision (i.e., the inverse of variance)
in statistics [30]. Assessing construct reliability means answering
the following question: do similar inputs to a measurement model,
possibly presented at different points in time, yield similar outputs?

Measurement and Fairness

If the answer to this question is no, then the model lacks reliability,
meaning that we may not want to use its measurements. We note
that a lack of reliability can also make it challenging to assess construct validity. Although different disciplines emphasize different
aspects of construct reliability, we argue that there is one aspect—
namely test–retest reliability, which we describe below—that is especially relevant in the context of fairness in computational systems.4
3.1.1 Test–retest reliability. Test–retest reliability refers to the extent to which measurements of an unobservable theoretical construct, obtained from a measurement model at different points in
time, remain the same, assuming that the construct has not changed.
For example, when measuring a person’s height, operationalized
as the length from the bottom of their feet to the top of their head
when standing erect, measurements that vary by several inches
from one day to the next would suggest a lack of test–retest reliability. Investigating this variability might reveal its cause to be the
assumption that a person’s shoes should contribute to their height.
As another example, many value-added models, including the
EVAAS MRM, have been criticized for their lack of test–retest
reliability. For instance, in Weapons of Math Destruction [46], O’Neil
described how value-added models often produce measurements of
teacher effectiveness that vary dramatically between years. In one
case, she described Tim Clifford, an accomplished and respected
New York City middle school teacher with over 26 years of teaching
experience. For two years in a row, Clifford was evaluated using a
value-added model, receiving a score of 6 out of 100 in the first year,
followed by a score of 96 in the second. It is extremely unlikely
that teacher effectiveness would vary so dramatically from one
year to the next. Instead, this variability, which suggests a lack of
test–retest reliability, points to a possible mismatch between the
construct purported to be measured and its operationalization.
As a third example, had the developers of the Universal Credit
benefits system described in section 2.2 assessed the test–retest
reliability of their system by checking that the system’s measurements of a claimant’s income were the same no matter when their
one-month rolling period began, they might have anticipated (and
even mitigated) the harms revealed by Human Rights Watch [55].
Finally, we note that an apparent lack of test–retest reliability
does not always point to a mismatch between the theoretical understanding of the construct purported to be measured and its operationalization. In some cases, an apparent lack of test–retest reliability can instead be the result of unexpected changes to the construct
itself. For example, although we typically think of a person’s height
as being something that remains relatively static over the course of
their adult life, most people actually get shorter as they get older.

4 Inter-rater reliability refers to the extent to which multiple raters, experts, judges, or

annotators agree in their assessments (i.e., outputs) when given the same task (i.e.,
inputs). Although inter-rater reliability plays a key role when measuring unobservable
theoretical constructs via qualitative methods, it is less immediately relevant when
using quantitative methods. For this reason, we omit inter-rater reliability from our
conceptualization of construct reliability. We also omit inter-item reliability, which
refers to the extent to which the inputs to a measurement model are correlated with one
another. Although we believe that inter-item reliability may be relevant in the context
of fairness in computational systems, we could not find any examples of fairnessrelated harms that would likely have been surfaced by assessing inter-item reliability.

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

3.2

Construct Validity

Whereas construct reliability is roughly analogous to the concept
of precision in statistics, construct validity is roughly analogous to
the concept of statistical unbiasedness [30]. Establishing construct
validity means demonstrating, in a variety of ways, that the measurements obtained from measurement model are both meaningful
and useful: Does the operationalization capture all relevant aspects
of the construct purported to be measured? Do the measurements
look plausible? Do they correlate with other measurements of the
same construct? Or do they vary in ways that suggest that the
operationalization may be inadvertently capturing aspects of other
constructs? Are the measurements predictive of measurements of
any relevant observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs) thought to be related to the construct, but not incorporated into the operationalization? Do the measurements support
known hypotheses about the construct? What are the consequences
of using the measurements—including any societal impacts [40, 52].
We emphasize that a key feature, not a bug, of construct validity
is that it is not a yes/no box to be checked: construct validity is
always a matter of degree, to be supported by critical reasoning [36].
Different disciplines have different conceptualizations of construct validity, each with its own rich history. For example, in some
disciplines, construct validity is considered distinct from content
validity and criterion validity, while in other disciplines, content
validity and criterion validity are grouped under the umbrella of
construct validity. Our conceptualization unites traditions from
political science, education, and psychology by bringing together
the seven different aspects of construct validity that we describe
below. We argue that each of these aspects plays a unique and
important role in understanding fairness in computational systems.
3.2.1 Face validity. Face validity refers to the extent to which the
measurements obtained from a measurement model look plausible—
a “sniff test” of sorts. This aspect of construct validity is inherently
subjective, so it is often viewed with skepticism if it is not supplemented with other, less subjective evidence. However, face validity
is a prerequisite for establishing construct validity: if the measurements obtained from a measurement model aren’t facially valid,
then they are unlikely to possess other aspects of construct validity.
It is likely that the models described in section 2 would yield
measurements that are, for the most part, facially valid. For example,
measurements obtained by using income as a proxy for SES would
most likely possess face validity. SES and income are certainly
related and, in general, a person at the high end of the income distribution (e.g., a CEO) will have a different SES than a person at the
low end (e.g., a barista). Similarly, given that COMPAS draws on several criminological theories to operationalize a defendant’s risk of
recidivism, it is likely that the resulting scores would look plausible.
One exception to this pattern is the EVAAS MRM. Some scores
may look plausible—after all, students’ test scores are not unrelated
to teacher effectiveness—but the dramatic variability that we described above in the context of test–retest reliability is implausible.
3.2.2 Content validity. Content validity refers to the extent to
which an operationalization wholly and fully captures the substantive nature of the construct purported to be measured. This aspect of
construct validity has three sub-aspects, which we describe below.

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

The first sub-aspect relates to the construct’s contestedness. If
a construct is essentially contested then it has multiple contextdependent, and sometimes even conflicting, theoretical understandings. Contestedness makes it inherently hard to assess content validity: if a construct has multiple theoretical understandings, then
it is unlikely that a single operationalization can wholly and fully
capture its substantive nature in a meaningful fashion. For this reason, some traditions make a single theoretical understanding of the
construct purported to be measured a prerequisite for establishing
content validity [25, 30]. However, other traditions simply require
an articulation of which understanding is being operationalized [53].
We take the perspective that the latter approach is more practical
because it is often the case that unobservable theoretical constructs
are essentially contested, yet we still wish to measure them. Indeed,
fairness itself is one such construct, as we explain in section 4.
Of the models described in section 2, most are intended to measure unobservable theoretical constructs that are (relatively) uncontested. One possible exception is patient benefit, which can be
understood in a variety of different ways. However, the understanding that is operationalized in most high-risk care management enrollment models is clearly articulated. As Obermeyer et al. explain,
“[the patients] with the greatest care needs will benefit the most”
from enrollment in high-risk care management programs [43].
The second sub-aspect of content validity is sometimes known
as substantive validity. This sub-aspect moves beyond the theoretical understanding of the construct purported to be measured
and focuses on the measurement modeling process—i.e., the assumptions made when moving from abstractions to mathematics.
Establishing substantive validity means demonstrating that the
operationalization incorporates measurements of those—and only
those—observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical
constructs, if appropriate) thought to be related to the construct.
For example, although a person’s income contributes to their SES,
their income is by no means the only contributing factor. Wealth,
education, and occupation all affect a person’s SES, as do other
unobservable theoretical constructs, such as cultural capital. For
instance, an artist with significant wealth but a low income should
have a higher SES than would be suggested by their income alone.
As another example, COMPAS defines recidivism as “a new misdemeanor or felony arrest within two years.” By assuming that
arrests are a reasonable proxy for crimes committed, COMPAS fails
to account for false arrests or crimes that do not result in arrests [50].
Indeed, no computational system can ever wholly and fully capture
the substantive nature of crime by using arrest data as a proxy.
Similarly, high-risk care management enrollment models assume
that care costs are a reasonable proxy for care needs. However, a patient’s care needs reflect their underlying health status, while their
care costs reflect both their access to care and their health status.
Finally, establishing structural validity, the third sub-aspect of
content validity, means demonstrating that the operationalization
captures the structure of the relationships between the incorporated observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical
constructs, if appropriate) and the construct purported to be measured, as well as the interrelationships between them [36, 40].
In addition to assuming that teacher effectiveness is wholly and
fully captured by students’ test scores—a clear threat to substantive
validity [2]—the EVAAS MRM assumes that a student’s test score

Jacobs and Wallach

for subject 𝑗 in grade 𝑘 in year 𝑙 is approximately equal to the sum
of the state or district’s estimated mean score for subject 𝑗 in grade
𝑘 in year 𝑙 and the student’s current and previous teachers’ effects
(weighted by the fraction of the student’s instructional time attributed to each teacher). However, this assumption ignores the fact
that, for many students, the relationship may be more complex.
3.2.3 Convergent validity. Convergent validity refers to the extent to which the measurements obtained from a measurement
model correlate with other measurements of the same construct,
obtained from measurement models for which construct validity
has already been established. This aspect of construct validity is
typically assessed using quantitative methods, though doing so can
reveal qualitative differences between different operationalizations.
We note that assessing convergent validity raises an inherent
challenge: “If a new measure of some construct differs from an
established measure, it is generally viewed with skepticism. If a
new measure captures exactly what the previous one did, then it
is probably unnecessary” [49]. The measurements obtained from
a new measurement model should therefore deviate only slightly
from existing measurements of the same construct. Moreover, for
the model to be viewed as possessing convergent validity, these deviations must be well justified and supported by critical reasoning.
Many value-added models, including the EVAAS MRM, lack
convergent validity [2]. For example, in Weapons of Math Destruction [46], O’Neil described Sarah Wysocki, a fifth-grade teacher who
received a low score from a value-added model despite excellent reviews from her principal, her colleagues, and her students’ parents.
As another example, measurements of SES obtained from the
model described in section 2.2 and measurements of SES obtained
from the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics would
likely correlate somewhat because both operationalizations incorporate income. However, the latter operationalization also incorporates measurements of other observable properties, including
wealth, education, occupation, economic pressure, geographic location, and family size [45]. As a result, it is also likely that there would
also be significant differences between the two sets of measurements. Investigating these differences might reveal aspects of the
substantive nature of SES, such as wealth or education, that are missing from the model described in section 2.2. In other words, and as
we described above, assessing convergent validity can reveal qualitative differences between different operationalizations of a construct.
We emphasize that assessing the convergent validity of a measurement model using measurements obtained from measurement
models that have not been sufficiently well validated can yield a
false sense of security. For example, scores obtained from COMPAS would likely correlate with scores obtained from other models
that similarly use arrests as a proxy for crimes committed, thereby
obscuring the threat to content validity that we described above.
3.2.4 Discriminant validity. Discriminant validity refers to the extent to which the measurements obtained from a measurement
model vary in ways that suggest that the operationalization may
be inadvertently capturing aspects of other constructs. Measurements of one construct should only correlate with measurements
of another to the extent that those constructs are themselves related. As a special case, if two constructs are totally unrelated, then
there should be no correlation between their measurements [25].

Measurement and Fairness

Establishing discriminant validity can be especially challenging
when a construct has relationships with many other constructs.
SES, for example, is related to almost all social and economic constructs, albeit to varying extents. For instance, SES and gender are
somewhat related due to labor segregation and the persistent gender wage gap, while SES and race are much more closely related
due to historical racial inequalities resulting from structural racism.
When assessing the discriminant validity of the model described in
section 2.2, we would therefore hope to find correlations that reflect
these relationships. If, however, we instead found that the resulting
measurements were perfectly correlated with gender or uncorrelated with race, this would suggest a lack of discriminant validity.
As another example, Obermeyer et al. found a strong correlation
between measurements of patients’ future care needs, operationalized as future care costs, and race [43]. According to their analysis of
one model, only 18% of the patients identified for enrollment in highrisk care management programs were Black. This correlation contradicts expectations. Indeed, given the enormous racial health disparities in the U.S., we might even expect to see the opposite pattern.
Further investigation by Obermeyer et al. revealed that this threat
to discriminant validity was caused by the confounding factor that
we described in section 2.5: Black and white patients with comparable past care needs had radically different past care costs—a consequence of structural racism that was then exacerbated by the model.
3.2.5 Predictive validity. Predictive validity refers to the extent
to which the measurements obtained from a measurement model
are predictive of measurements of any relevant observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs) thought to be
related to the construct purported to be measured, but not incorporated into the operationalization. Assessing predictive validity
is therefore distinct from out-of-sample prediction [24, 41]. Predictive validity can be assessed using either qualitative or quantitative methods. We note that in contrast to the aspects of construct
validity that we discussed above, predictive validity is primarily
concerned with the utility of the measurements, not their meaning.
As a simple illustration of predictive validity, taller people generally weigh more than shorter people. Measurements of a person’s
height should therefore be somewhat predictive of their weight.
Similarly, a person’s SES is related to many observable properties—
ranging from purchasing behavior to media appearances—that are
not always incorporated into models for measuring SES. Measurements obtained by using income as a proxy for SES would most
likely be somewhat predictive of many of these properties, at least
for people at the high and low ends of the income distribution.
We note that the relevant observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs) need not be “downstream” of
(i.e., thought to be influenced by) the construct. Predictive validity
can also be assessed using “upstream” properties and constructs,
provided that they are not incorporated into the operationalization.
For example, Obermeyer et al. investigated the extent to which
measurements of patients’ future care needs, operationalized as
future care costs, were predictive of patients’ health statuses (which
were not part of the model that they analyzed) [43]. They found
that Black and white patients with comparable future care costs did
not have comparable health statuses—a threat to predictive validity
caused (again) by the confounding factor described in section 2.5.

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

3.2.6 Hypothesis validity. Hypothesis validity refers to the extent
to which the measurements obtained from a measurement model
support substantively interesting hypotheses about the construct
purported to be measured. Much like predictive validity, hypothesis
validity is primarily concerned with the utility of the measurements.
We note that the main distinction between predictive validity and
hypothesis validity hinges on the definition of “substantively interesting hypotheses.” As a result, the distinction is not always clear
cut. For example, is the hypothesis “People with higher SES are more
likely to be mentioned in the New York Times” sufficiently substantively interesting? Or would it be more appropriate to use the hypothesized relationship to assess predictive validity? For this reason,
some traditions merge predictive and hypothesis validity [e.g., 30].
Turning again to the value-added models discussed in section 2.3,
it is extremely unlikely that the dramatically variable scores obtained from such models would support most substantively interesting hypotheses involving teacher effectiveness, again suggesting
a possible mismatch between the theoretical understanding of the
construct purported to be measured and its operationalization.
Using income as a proxy for SES would likely support some—
though not all—substantively interesting hypotheses involving SES.
For example, many social scientists have studied the relationship
between SES and health outcomes, demonstrating that people with
lower SES tend to have worse health outcomes. Measurements of
SES obtained from the model described in section 2.2 would likely
support this hypothesis, albeit with some notable exceptions. For
instance, wealthy college students often have low incomes but good
access to healthcare. Combined with their young age, this means
that they typically have better health outcomes than other people
with comparable incomes. Examining these exceptions might reveal aspects of the substantive nature of SES, such as wealth and
education, that are missing from the model described in section 2.2.
3.2.7 Consequential validity. Consequential validity, the final aspect in our fairness-oriented conceptualization of construct validity,
is concerned with identifying and evaluating the consequences of
using the measurements obtained from a measurement model, including any societal impacts. Assessing consequential validity often
reveals fairness-related harms. Consequential validity was first introduced by Messick, who argued that the consequences of using
the measurements obtained from a measurement model are fundamental to establishing construct validity [40]. This is because
the values that are reflected in those consequences both derive
from and contribute back the theoretical understanding of the construct purported to be measured. In other words, the “measurements
both reflect structure in the natural world, and impose structure
upon it,” [26]—i.e., the measurements shape the ways that we understand the construct itself. Assessing consequential validity therefore
means answering the following questions: How is the world shaped
by using the measurements? What world do we wish to live in? If
there are contexts in which the consequences of using the measurements would cause us to compromise values that we wish to uphold, then the measurements should not be used in those contexts.
For example, when designing a kitchen, we might use measurements of a person’s standing height to determine the height at
which to place their kitchen countertop. However, this may render the countertop inaccessible to them if they use a wheelchair.

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

As another example, because the Universal Credit benefits system described in section 2.2 assumed that measuring a person’s
monthly income by totaling the wages deposited into their account
over a single one-month period would yield error-free measurements, many people—especially those with irregular pay schedules—
received substantially lower benefits than they were entitled to.
The consequences of using scores obtained from value-added
models are well described in the literature on fairness in computational systems. Many school districts have used such scores
to make decisions about resource distribution and even teachers’
continued employment, often without any way to contest these
decisions [2, 3]. In turn, this has caused schools to manipulate their
scores and encouraged teachers to “teach to the test,” instead of designing more diverse and substantive curricula [46]. As well as the
cases described above in sections 3.1.1 and 3.2.3, in which teachers
were fired on the basis of low scores despite evidence suggesting
that their scores might be inaccurate, Amrein-Beardsley and Geiger
[3] found that EVAAS consistently gave lower scores to teachers at
schools with higher proportions of non-white students, students receiving special education services, lower-SES students, and English
language learners. Although it is possible that more effective teachers simply chose not to teach at those schools, it is far more likely
that these lower scores reflect societal biases and structural inequalities. When scores obtained from value-added models are used to
make decisions about resource distribution and teachers’ continued
employment, these biases and inequalities are then exacerbated.
The consequences of using scores obtained from COMPAS are
also well described in the literature on fairness in computational systems, most notably by Angwin et al. [4], who showed that COMPAS
incorrectly scored Black defendants as high risk more often than
white defendants, while incorrectly scoring white defendants as low
risk more often than Black defendants. By defining recidivism as “a
new misdemeanor or felony arrest within two years,” COMPAS fails
to account for false arrests or crimes that do not result in arrests.
This assumption therefore encodes and exacerbates racist policing
practices, leading to the racial disparities uncovered by Angwin
et al. Indeed, by using arrests as a proxy for crimes committed,
COMPAS can only exacerbate racist policing practices, rather than
transcending them [7, 13, 23, 37, 39]. Furthermore, the COMPAS documentation asserts that “the COMPAS risk scales are actuarial risk
assessment instruments. Actuarial risk assessment is an objective
method of estimating the likelihood of reoffending. An individual’s
level of risk is estimated based on known recidivism rates of offenders with similar characteristics” [19]. By describing COMPAS as an
“objective method,” Northpointe misrepresents the measurement
modeling process, which necessarily involves making assumptions
and is thus never objective. Worse yet, the label of objectiveness
obscures the organizational, political, societal, and cultural values
that are embedded in COMPAS and reflected in its consequences.
Finally, we return to the high-risk care management models described in section 2.5. By operationalizing greatest care needs as
greatest care costs, these models fail to account for the fact that
patients with comparable past care needs but different access to
care will likely have different past care costs. This omission has
the greatest impact on Black patients. Indeed, when analyzing one
such model, Obermeyer et al. found that only 18% of the patients
identified for enrollment were Black [43]. In addition, Obermeyer

Jacobs and Wallach

et al. found that Black and white patients with comparable future
care costs did not have comparable health statuses. In other words,
these models exacerbate the enormous racial health disparities in
the U.S. as a consequence of a seemingly innocuous assumption.

4

FAIRNESS AS A CONSTRUCT

We now explain how measurement modeling can contribute to
recent debates about fairness definitions. Although fairness feels
instinctively different to the constructs discussed so far, it is an
unobservable theoretical construct, albeit one about which there
have been millennia of disagreements. These disagreements reflect
the fact that fairness is an essentially contested construct [21, 42]—
i.e., fairness has multiple context-dependent, and sometimes even
conflicting, theoretical understandings. The contested nature of fairness makes it inherently hard to measure: As we described in section 3.2.2, some traditions make a single theoretical understanding a
prerequisite for establishing content—and hence construct—validity.
Other traditions (which we draw on in our fairness-oriented conceptualization of construct validity) abandon this prerequisite and
instead simply require an articulation of which understanding is
being operationalized, arguing that a failure to do this makes it
difficult to meaningfully compare different operationalizations.
We start by discussing aspects of the substantive nature of fairness that are necessarily missing from the quantitative, parity-based
operationalizations commonly found in the literature on fairness
in computational systems, focusing on the resulting threats to both
content and convergent validity. We then draw on well-known
examples from this literature to argue that although recent debates
about fairness definitions have been framed in terms of operationalizations, they are, in fact, debates about different theoretical understandings of fairness—i.e., debates about values. We argue that by
framing these debates in terms of operationalizations, they are rendered less accessible to the stakeholders that are most likely to be
affected by the computational systems in question. Finally, we touch
briefly on the role of demographic factors in measuring fairness.

4.1

The Substantive Nature of Fairness

To date, much of the literature on fairness in computational systems
has focused primarily on quantitative, parity-based operationalizations of fairness [e.g., 17, 20, 28]. These operationalizations are
appealing to computer scientists because of their quantitative nature and because they operate within the boundaries of a single
computational system, without reference to the broader societal
context in which the system is situated [38]. Yet these same properties mean that these operationalizations necessarily lack aspects
of the substantive nature of fairness found in many of the theoretical understandings long discussed by philosophers, lawyers,
and social scientists. For example, Arneson [5] presents four different, and sometimes conflicting, theoretical understandings of
equal opportunity—itself an understanding of fairness. Of these understandings, it might be possible to operationalize at most one or
two using quantitative, parity-based methods. Operationalizing the
others using such methods would lead to a lack of content validity.
We note that many theoretical understandings of fairness, including some of the understandings discussed by Arneson [5], depend

Measurement and Fairness

on some notion of justice, such as procedural justice, distributive justice, or representational justice. Any operationalization of fairness
that omits justice entirely cannot therefore be thought of as wholly
and fully capturing the substantive nature of these understandings.
Moreover, any such operationalization would likely be ineffective at
remedying historical injustices—a threat to consequential validity.

4.2

Individual Fairness vs. Group Fairness

Putting aside the threats posed to content and consequential validity by quantitative, parity-based operationalizations of fairness, we
turn next to the recent debates about fairness definitions found in
the literature on fairness in computational systems. In what was
arguably the first such debate, Dwork et al. [17] contrasted individual fairness, which requires that similar people be treated similarly,
and group fairness, which requires that different groups of people,
such as groups defined in terms of different demographic factors, be
treated similarly. Dwork et al. argued that computational systems
that satisfy some definition of group fairness can still yield fairnessrelated harms for people belonging to those groups. This argument
has been discussed in many papers since then [e.g., 12, 13, 32], forming an ongoing debate about individual fairness and group fairness.
Although this debate is usually framed in terms of mathematics—
i.e., in terms of operationalizations—it is, at its core, a debate about
different theoretical understandings of fairness. Viewing the debate
through the lens of measurement modeling offers a new way to
engage with it. Individual fairness and group fairness are conflicting
theoretical understandings of fairness. In contrast to the former
understanding, the latter understanding fails to account for fairnessrelated harms experienced by individual people. Any operationalization of the latter understanding will necessarily lack content
validity if it is viewed as an operationalization of the former. The debate is therefore about values—i.e., to what extent should individual
experiences matter?—not about the measurement modeling process.

4.3

Individual Fairness

Even debates about different definitions of individual fairness are
often debates about different theoretical understandings. Individual
fairness requires that similar people be treated similarly. However,
the similarity of two people is itself an essentially contested construct, with multiple context-dependent theoretical understandings.
Moreover, even when focusing on a single understanding, measuring the similarity of two people is a nontrivial undertaking that
involves many different aspects of the human experience, including
aspects that are inherently subjective or personal. Any practical
operationalization of similarity will therefore likely lack content—
and possibly even consequential—validity [29]. Yet academic papers
about individual fairness often obscure or downplay this reality.
For example, although Dwork et al. acknowledge that similarity
may not be easy to measure, they argue that “the [similarity] metric
may reflect the ‘best’ available approximation as agreed upon by
society” [17]. Despite giving an implicit nod to the assumptions
involved in the measurement modeling process, including the assumption of which theoretical understanding to operationalize, this
definition obscures the difficulty of making explicit and testing
those assumptions by using the phrase “as agreed upon by society.”
As another example, Joseph et al. present a framework for “ensuring” individual fairness when using a computational system to

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

decide who should receive some resource or opportunity [31, 32].
Crucially, their framework assumes that recipients should be selected the basis of their quality, which is further assumed to be
observable and easy to measure directly, yielding error-free measurements: “[O]ur definition of fairness... assumes the existence of
an accurate mapping from features to true quality for the task at
hand” [31]. This assumption downplays the fact that quality is an
essentially contested construct, in turn downplaying the difficulty
of measuring the similarity of two people in terms of their quality.

4.4

Group Fairness

Like debates about individual fairness, debates about different definitions of group fairness are often debates about different theoretical understandings. The most well-known debate about group
fairness involves COMPAS, which operationalizes a defendant’s
risk of recidivism using measurements of a variety of observable
properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs), as we
described in section 2.4. The debate began when Angwin et al. [4]
showed that COMPAS incorrectly scored Black defendants as high
risk more often than white defendants, while incorrectly scoring
white defendants as low risk more often than Black defendants.
In other words, Angwin et al. showed that COMPAS was unfair
because it lacked error-rate balance.5 Northpointe responded by arguing that COMPAS was fair because the probability of recidivism
among Black defendants scored as high risk was the same as the
probability of recidivism among white defendants scored as high
risk—i.e., COMPAS possessed predictive parity. Prompted by this,
many academic papers began to discuss the properties and shortcomings of different definitions of group fairness, with some papers
demonstrating that it is impossible for a system like COMPAS to
possess both error-rate balance and predictive parity when the
probability of recidivism for Black defendants is not the same as the
probability of recidivism for white defendants [9, 11, 13, 15, 34, 48].
Despite being framed in terms of operationalizations, this debate
is actually about different theoretical understandings of fairness.
Indeed, in their discussion of the debate, Corbett et al. wrote, “At the
heart of [the] disagreement is a subtle ethical question: What does
it mean for an algorithm to be fair?” [14]. In other words, error-rate
balance and predictive parity are operationalizations of different theoretical understandings of group fairness. These understandings—
and hence their operationalizations—have very different consequences. Predictive parity means that a score has the same meaning
when it is given to a Black defendant as it does when it is given to
a white defendant. In contrast, error-rate balance means that the
errors experienced by Black defendants and white defendants are
comparable. Choosing one of these theoretical understandings over
the other therefore means choosing which values we wish to uphold. But, by couching the debate in mathematics, this choice is concealed from the stakeholders that are most likely to be affected by it.

4.5

Demographic Factors

Group fairness, as we explained in section 4.2, requires that different
groups of people, such as groups defined in terms of different demographic factors, be treated similarly. But many demographic factors,
such as race or gender, are themselves essentially contested constructs, with theoretical understandings that vary across cultures
5 Error-rate balance is also known as equalized odds [28].

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

and over time. As a result, measuring group fairness often requires
that we first undertake the non-trivial task of measuring these constructs. Ideally, measurements of these constructs should be self
reported, thereby limiting the potential for harmful errors. However,
there are many contexts in which self-reports at the level of individual people are not available or readily accessible. In these contexts,
it may be tempting to infer the relevant constructs from measurements of observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical
constructs) thought to be related to them—i.e., operationalize them
via a measurement model. We emphasize that even with careful
consideration of different theoretical understandings and careful
assessment of both construct reliability and construct validity, this
approach is fraught and likely to cause a variety of fairness-related
and other harms [e.g., 8, 22, 33, 35, 44], despite good intentions. In
other words, the consequences of using the resulting measurements
will likely cause us to compromise values that we wish to uphold.

5

DISCUSSION

Many computational systems involve unobservable theoretical
constructs—abstractions that describe phenomena of theoretical
interest, such as socioeconomic status, teacher effectiveness, and
risk of recidivism. Because these constructs cannot be measured
directly, they must instead be inferred from measurements of observable properties (and other unobservable theoretical constructs)
thought to be related to them. However, this process—the measurement modeling process—necessarily involves making assumptions,
thereby introducing the potential for mismatches between the theoretical understanding of the construct purported to be measured
and its operationalization. As we argued in section 3, many of the
harms studied in the literature on fairness in computational systems
are direct results of such mismatches. This is because the assumptions made when moving from abstractions to mathematics often
encode and exacerbate societal biases and structural inequalities.
Although measurement modeling is fundamental to the quantitative social sciences, it has not traditionally played a role in computer
science. As a result, researchers and practitioners are often inclined
to collapse the distinctions between constructs and their operationalizations, either colloquially or epistemically. But collapsing
these distinctions removes opportunities to anticipate and mitigate fairness-related harms by eliding the space in which they are
most often introduced. Further compounding this issue is the fact
that measurements of unobservable theoretical constructs are often
treated as if they were obtained directly and without errors—i.e.,
a source of ground truth. Measurements end up standing in for the
constructs purported to be measured, normalizing the assumptions
made during the measurement modeling process and embedding
them throughout society. In other words, “measures are more than
a creation of society, they create society” [1]—a view also expressed
by Bowker and Star in their exploration of the consequences of classification in computing systems [10].6 Collapsing the distinctions
6 Bowker and Star express the view that measurements create society via their discus-

sion of classification in computational systems [10]. To see how classification in computational systems subtly but fundamentally creates categories and stratifications in
the world, consider a user creating an account on a website. The website might require
the user to select either “Male” or “Female” as their gender, refusing to create the user’s
account if one of these options is not selected. Bowker and Star argue that these kinds
of design choices are fundamentally political: “Seemingly purely technical issues like
how to name things and how to store data in fact constitute much of human interaction

Jacobs and Wallach

between constructs and their operationalizations is therefore not
just theoretically or pedantically concerning—it is practically concerning with very real, fairness-related consequences. Moreover, because most computational systems are developed by computer scientists, the practice of collapsing these distinctions is widespread [47].
We argue that measurement modeling provides a both a language for articulating the distinctions between constructs and their
operationalizations and set of tools—namely construct reliability
and construct validity—for surfacing possible mismatches. In section 3, we therefore proposed fairness-oriented conceptualizations
of construct reliability and construct validity, uniting traditions
from political science, education, and psychology. We showed how
these conceptualizations can be used to 1) anticipate fairness-related
harms that can be obscured by focusing primarily on out-of-sample
prediction, and 2) identify potential causes of fairness-related harms
in ways that reveal concrete, actionable avenues for mitigating them.
We acknowledge that assessing construct reliability and construct
validity can be time-consuming. However, ignoring them means
that we run the risk of creating a world that we do not wish to live in.
Finally, we turned to fairness itself, highlighting aspects of the
substantive nature of fairness that are missing from the quantitative,
parity-based operationalizations commonly found in the literature
on fairness in computational systems. We argue that although recent debates about fairness definitions have been framed in terms
of operationalizations, they are, in fact, debates about different
theoretical understandings of fairness—i.e., debates about values.
Moreover, many definitions of fairness involve other essentially
contested constructs, such as similarity, quality, and even demographic factors like race or gender. These relationships are therefore
reminiscent of the “layers of bias” described by Eckhouse et al. [18]
in the context of risk assessment models: “[E]ach layer depends
on the layers below it: Without assurances about the foundational
layers, the fairness of the top layers is irrelevant.” Worse yet, by
using such fairness definitions to label computational systems as
“fair,” we risk the adoption of these systems without any critical
assessment because their fairness is assumed to be guaranteed.
To conclude, measurement modeling promotes greater transparency and accountability by providing researchers and practitioners with a set of tools for making explicit and testing assumptions.
By using these tools to surface mismatches between constructs and
their operationalizations, researchers will be better able to anticipate and mitigate fairness-related harms arising from computational systems. Although measurement modeling is largely missing
from computer science, we argue that it should be essential knowledge for everyone developing or deploying computational systems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Solon Barocas, Su Lin Blodgett, Alex Chouldechova, Hal
Daumé, Lise Getoor, Moritz Hardt, Josh Kroll, Alexandra Olteanu,
Forough Poursabzi-Sangdeh, Brandon Stewart, Philip Thomas, Jenn
Wortman Vaughan, and many others for feedback on this paper.

REFERENCES
[1] Ken Alder. 2002. The measure of all things: The seven-year odyssey and hidden
error that transformed the world.
and much of what we come to know as natural.” As another example, many researchers
have argued that race as a category further entrenches structural racism [e.g., 7, 27].

Measurement and Fairness

[2] Audrey Amrein-Beardsley. 2008. Methodological concerns about the Education
Value-Added Assessment System. Educational Researcher 37, 2 (2008), 65–75.
[3] Audrey Amrein-Beardsley and Tray Geiger. 2020. Methodological Concerns
About the Education Value-Added Assessment System (EVAAS): Validity, Reliability, and Bias. SAGE Open 10, 2 (2020), 2158244020922224.
[4] Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. 2016. Machine Bias.
ProPublica (May 2016).
[5] Richard Arneson. 2018. Four conceptions of equal opportunity. The Economic
Journal 128, 612 (2018), F152–F173.
[6] Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, Aaron Shapiro, and Hanna Wallach. 2017. The
problem with bias: from allocative to representational harms in machine learning.
Special Interest Group for Computing. Information and Society (SIGCIS) (2017).
[7] Ruha Benjamin. 2019. Race after Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim
Code.
[8] Cynthia Bennett and Os Keyes. 2020. What is the point of fairness? Interactions
27, 3 (2020), 35–39.
[9] Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth.
2018. Fairness in criminal justice risk assessments: the state of the art. Soc. Meth.
Res. (2018). https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124118782533
[10] Geoffrey C Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. Sorting things out: Classification
and its consequences. MIT Press.
[11] Alexandra Chouldechova. 2017. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study
of bias in recidivism prediction instruments. Big Data 5, 2 (2017), 153–163.
[12] Alexandra Chouldechova and Aaron Roth. 2018. The frontiers of fairness in
machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08810 (2018).
[13] Sam Corbett-Davies and Sharad Goel. 2018. The Measure and Mismeasure of
Fairness: A Critical Review of Fair Machine Learning. Preprint, arXiv:1808.00023
(2018).
[14] Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, and Sharad Goel. 2016. A computer program used for bail and sentencing decisions was labeled biased against
blacks. It’s actually not that clear. Washington Post (October 2016).
[15] Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. 2017.
Algorithmic decision making and the cost of fairness.
[16] Kate Crawford. 2017. The Trouble with Bias. NIPS Keynote, https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=fMym_BKWQzk, accessed 08-22-2018.
[17] Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard
Zemel. 2012. Fairness through awareness. ITCS (2012).
[18] Laurel Eckhouse, Kristian Lum, Cynthia Conti-Cook, and Julie Ciccolini. 2019.
Layers of bias: A unified approach for understanding problems with risk assessment. Criminal Justice and Behavior 46, 2 (2019), 185–209.
[19] equivant. 2017. Practitioner’s Guide to COMPAS Core. http://www.equivant.
com/assets/img/content/Practitioners_Guide_COMPASCore_121917.pdf
http://www.equivant.com/assets/img/content/Practitioners_Guide_
COMPASCore_121917.pdf, accessed 08-22-2018.
[20] Sorelle A Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2016.
On the (im)possibility of fairness. Preprint, arXiv:1609.07236 (2016).
[21] Walter Bryce Gallie. 1955. Essentially contested concepts. In Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, Vol. 56. JSTOR, 167–198.
[22] Jake Goldenfein. 2019. The Profiling Potential of Computer Vision and the
Challenge of Computational Empiricism. In Proc. 2019 ACM FAT* Conference.
[23] Ben Green. 2020. The false promise of risk assessments: epistemic reform and the
limits of fairness. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency. 594–606.
[24] Justin Grimmer. 2012. Comment: Evaluating model performance in fictitious
prediction problems. Technical Report.
[25] David J Hand. 2004. Measurement theory and practice. Arnold, Hodder Headline.
[26] David J Hand. 2016. Measurement: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford Univ. Press.
[27] Alex Hanna, Emily Denton, Andrew Smart, and Jamila Smith-Loud. 2020. Towards
a critical race methodology in algorithmic fairness. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 501–512.
[28] Mortiz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. 2016. Equality of Opportunity in Supervised Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 29.
[29] Anna Lauren Hoffmann. 2020. Rawls, Information Technology, and the Sociotechnical Bases of Self-Respect. In The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Technology.
[30] Simon Jackman. 2008. Measurement. In The Oxford Handbook of Political Methodology. Oxford Univ. Press, Chapter 9.
[31] Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, Seth Neel, and Aaron
Roth. 2017. Fair algorithms for infinite and contextual bandits. FATML, preprint
arXiv:1610.09559 (2017).
[32] Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie H Morgenstern, and Aaron Roth. 2016.
Fairness in learning: Classic and contextual bandits. NIPS (2016).
[33] Os Keyes. 2018. The misgendering machines: Trans/HCI implications of automatic
gender recognition. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2,
CSCW (2018), 1–22.
[34] Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. 2017. Inherent
trade-offs in the fair determination of risk scores. ITCS (2017).
[35] Brian N Larson. 2017. Gender as a variable in natural-language processing:
Ethical considerations. In Proc. of First Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language

FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada

Processing.
[36] Jane Loevinger. 1957. Objective tests as instruments of psychological theory.
Psychological Reports 3, 3 (1957), 635–694.
[37] Kristian Lum and William Isaac. 2016. To predict and serve? Significance 13, 5
(2016), 14–19.
[38] Donald Martin, Jr, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Jill Kuhlberg, Andrew Smart, and
William S Isaac. 2020. Extending the Machine Learning Abstraction Boundary:
A Complex Systems Approach to Incorporate Societal Context. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.09663 (2020).
[39] Sandra G Mayson. 2018. Bias in, bias out. Yale Law Journal 128 (2018), 2218.
[40] Samuel Messick. 1987. Validity. In ETS Research Report Series.
[41] Sendhil Mullainathan and Jann Spiess. 2017. Machine learning: an applied econometric approach. Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, 2 (2017), 87–106.
[42] Deirdre K Mulligan, Colin Koopman, and Nick Doty. 2016. Privacy is an essentially
contested concept: a multi-dimensional analytic for mapping privacy. Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. A 374, 2083 (2016), 20160118.
[43] Ziad Obermeyer, Brian Powers, Christine Vogeli, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2019.
Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations.
Science 366, 6464 (2019), 447–453.
[44] Alexandra Olteanu, Carlos Castillo, Fernando Diaz, and Emre Kiciman. 2019.
Social data: Biases, methodological pitfalls, and ethical boundaries. Frontiers in
Big Data 2 (2019), 13.
[45] National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics (NCVHS). 2012. Re: Development of Standards for the Collection of Socioeconomic Status in Health
Surveys Conducted by the Department of Health and Human Services. https:
//www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/120622lt.pdf
[46] Cathy O’Neil. 2016. Weapons of Math Destruction. Broadway Books.
[47] Samir Passi and Solon Barocas. 2019. Problem Formulation and Fairness. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Atlanta,
GA, USA) (FAT* ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 39–48. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3287560.3287567
[48] Geoff Pleiss, Manish Raghavan, Felix Wu, Jon Kleinberg, and Kilian Q Weinberger.
2017. On fairness and calibration. NIPS (2017).
[49] Kevin M Quinn, Burt L Monroe, Michael Colaresi, Michael H Crespin, and
Dragomir R Radev. 2010. How to analyze political attention with minimal assumptions and costs. American Journal of Political Science 54, 1 (2010), 209–228.
[50] Anna Roberts. 2018. Arrests as guilt. Ala. L. Rev. 70 (2018), 987.
EVAAS for K-12 Statistical Models.
Available at
[51] SAS. [n.d.].
https://www.sas.com/content/dam/SAS/en_us/doc/whitepaper1/sas-evaask12-statistical-models-107411.pdf, accessed 08-23-2018.
[52] Andrew D Selbst, Sorelle Friedler, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, Janet Vertesi, et al.
2019. Fairness and Abstraction in Sociotechnical Systems. In ACM Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*).
[53] Stephen G Sireci. 1998. The construct of content validity. Social Indicators
Research 45, 1-3 (1998), 83–117.
[54] Catalina L Toma, Jeffrey T Hancock, and Nicole B Ellison. 2008. Separating
fact from fiction: An examination of deceptive self-presentation in online dating
profiles. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34, 8 (2008), 1023–1036.
[55] Human Rights Watch. 2020. UK: Automated Benefits System Failing People in
Need. https://www.hrw.org/news/2020/09/29/uk-automated-benefits-systemfailing-people-need

